PR for version 06 (#45)
NLnetLabs/draft-toorop-dnsop-dns-catalog-zones: draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-catalog-zones.md

The names of member zones are represented on the RDATA side (instead of as a part of owner names) of a PTR record, so that all valid domain names may be represented regardless of their length [@!RFC1035].
This PTR record MUST be the only record in the PTR RRset with the same name.
More than one record in the RRset denotes a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).

> A clear error message stating that more than one PTR in the RRset caused the
> broken catalog, with the owner name of that RRset, MUST be logged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken MUST always be communicated clearly to the operator.
```

I'm open to other wording, but "logged" prescribes too much about how one operates their services.

Reviewer 2: I disagree with @Habbie, as "logged" in my mind does not necessarily mean a written log message; any "log event" (e.g. web hook triggering an alert, ...) would also qualify. But I don't mind more general phrasing.

When keeping this, perhaps add `(e.g. through a log message)`, to not falsely imply that "communicated" means sending some kind of message.

Author: Okay, combining all the feedback, I got:
```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

where `<unique-N>` is a label that tags each record in the collection.
`<unique-N>` has an unique value in the collection.

> When different `<unique-N>` labels have the same value, the catalog zone is broken and MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When different `<unique-N>` labels hold the same PTR (i.e. point to the same member zone), the catalog zone is broken and MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).
```

Author: @Habbie , how about this: (only added value after PTR)

```suggestion
When different `<unique-N>` labels hold the same PTR value (i.e. point to the same member zone), the catalog zone is broken and MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).
```

querying via recursive resolvers.

## Properties

Apart from catalog zone metadata stored at the apex (NS, SOA and the like), catalog zone information is stored in the form of "properties".
Catalog consumers SHOULD ignore properties they do not understand.

> Properties have a name combined with an associated RR type.
> Properties that have a name known to a catalog consumer, but the wrong RR type,
> SHOULD be ignored.

Reviewer 2: Implementors may specify properties that require several record sets of different types. The following suggestion covers this:

```suggestion
Properties are identified by their name, which is used as an owner name prefix for one or more record sets underneath a member node, with type(s) as appropriate for the respective property.
Record sets that appear at a property owner name known to the catalog consumer, but with the wrong RR type, invalidate the property as a whole.
The consumer SHOULD ignore such invalid properties as a whole.
```

Reviewer 3: This is better, but I don't like the word `invalidate` (or invalid), because invalid properties are such, that MUST kill the whole catalog processing. Unknown RRs just are to be ignored. And IMHO, if it appears in a way that there is a known goor property, plus some additional unknow RR types, it MUST NOT invalidate the property. I would vote for simply ignoring unknown RR (types) in any occasion, and continuing as if they weren't there:
```
Properties are identified by their name, which is used as an owner name prefix for one or more record sets underneath a member node, with type(s) as appropriate for the respective property.
Record sets that appear at a property owner name known to the catalog consumer, but with another RR type, SHOULD be ignored by the consumer.
```

Reviewer 4: I agree with libor on the suggested behavior and naming such records something else than "invalid" ("unknown" makes a lot of sense to me). I would use that instead of "another RR type".

```
Properties are identified by their name, which is used as an owner name prefix for one or more
record sets underneath a member node, with type(s) as appropriate for the respective property.
Record sets that appear at a property owner name known to the catalog consumer but with an
unknown RR type, SHOULD be ignored by the consumer.
```

Known properties with the correct RR type, but which are for some reason

> invalid (for example because of an impossible value or because of an illegal

Author: We removed invalid from above, so I think we can keep it here. WDYT @peterthomassen ?

> number of RRs in the RRset), denotes a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of RRs in the RRset), denote a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be
```

processed (see (#generalrequirements)).

> A clear error message stating which invalid property caused the broken catalog,
> with the reason why it was considered invalid, MUST be logged.

Author: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

> with the reason why it was considered invalid, MUST be logged.

Reviewer 2: @Habbie commented on "logged" above; ditto here.

Reviewer 4: Personally I see logging as something that is not speficically required to make catalog zones interoperable with another, so I would be in favor of using non-RFC2119 language here.

Author: It is actually relevant for interoperability because properties are optional and thus consumers may behave differently with "broken" properties (i.e. stop processing or ignore)

Author: Fixed in commit Aram Sargsyan

Author: The text has changed to:

The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).

@matje Do you feel "SHOULD" should be "should"?

Author: I guess SHOULD is just fine...

The catalog zone schema version is specified by an integer value embedded in a TXT RR named `version.$CATZ`.
All catalog zones MUST have a TXT RRset named `version.$CATZ` with exactly one RR.

Catalog consumers MUST NOT apply catalog zone processing to 

  - zones without the `version` property
  - zones with a `version` property with more than one RR in the RRset
  - zones with a `version` property without an expected value in the
    `version.$CATZ` TXT RR

These conditions signify a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be processed (see
(#generalrequirements)).
A clear error message about the precise condition which cause the catalog zone

> to be broken MUST be logged.

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: Fixed in commit 830d3346

> A clear error message about the precise condition which cause the catalog zone
> to be broken MUST be logged.

Author: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

The PTR RRset MUST consist of a single PTR record.
More than one record in the RRset denotes a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).

> A clear error message stating which invalid `coo` property caused the broken
> catalog, with the reason why it was considered invalid, MUST be logged.

Author: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

The `coo` property can be implemented in a stateless fashion when a certain order in the steps is adhered to:

>    1. First the `coo` property is added to a member zone of `$OLDCATZ`. 
>       Or, instead of adding the `coo` property, an existing property can also be updated with the new value: `$NEWCATZ`.

Reviewer 2: It is not defined what value the `coo` property has when it is added (only when it is changed).

```suggestion
   1. First the `coo` property for a member zone of `$OLDCATZ` is set to the value `$NEWCATZ`.
      This is achieved by either creating (or replacing) the corresponding PTR record.
```

The value of the TXT record MUST be at most 255 octets long and MUST NOT contain whitespace characters.
The consumer MUST interpret the value case-sensitively.

A `group` property with an invalid value or a `group` property with more than one record in the RRset, denotes a broken catalog zone which MUST NOT be processed (see (#generalrequirements)).

> A clear error message stating which invalid `group` property caused the broken

Author: The other text has been adapted, so this is resolved.

> catalog, with the reason why it was considered invalid, MUST be logged.

Reviewer 2: ditto ("logged")

Author: Resolved in 830d3346

> A clear error message stating which invalid `group` property caused the broken
> catalog, with the reason why it was considered invalid, MUST be logged.

Author: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

However, for the purpose of catalog processing, consumers MUST ignore
such broken catalog zones, and instead treat them as a regular DNS zone.

When a previously correct catalog zone becomes a broken catalog zone, because
of an update through an incremental transfer or otherwise, it loses its catalog
meaning and MUST be treated as a regular DNS zone.
No special processing occurs, no previously by this catalog configured member
are removed or reconfigured in any way.
Processing of the catalog resumes again when the catalog turns into a correct
catalog zone again, for example by an additional update (through IXFR or
otherwise) fixing the catalog zone.

Similarly, when a catalog zone expires, it loses its catalog meaning and
MUST be treated as a regular DNS zone.

> No special processing occurs until the zone becomes fresh again.

Reviewer 2: There was a concern that "regular DNS zone" sounds like the zone suddenly can be queried like a normal zone. How about:

```
... expires [or, further up: becomes a broken catalog zone], it is turned ineffectual. Catalog processing is ceased, and no special treatment occurs until the zone becomes fresh again.
```

Perhaps "ineffectual" is not the most understandable word, but my dictionary didn't yield a better one ... Anyway, just throwing in some inspiration.

Author: Thanks @peterthomassen , but you must have commented before I pushed commit 23a56a2 . I tried to address it by just removing text.

As it is a regular DNS zone, a catalog zone can be transferred using DNS zone
transfers among nameservers.

Catalog updates should be automatic, i.e., when a nameserver that supports
catalog zones completes a zone transfer for a catalog zone, it SHOULD apply
changes to the catalog within the running nameserver automatically without any
manual intervention.

Nameservers MAY allow loading and transfer of broken zones with incorrect
catalog zone syntax (as they are treated as regular zones).
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).

When a previously correct catalog zone becomes a broken catalog zone, because
of an update through an incremental transfer or otherwise, it loses its catalog
meaning.

> No special processing occurs, no previously by this catalog configured member
> are removed or reconfigured in any way.

Author: @peterthomassen and @matje , this better?  or perhaps MUST NOT
```suggestion
No special processing occurs. Member zones previously configured by this catalog
SHOULD NOT be removed or reconfigured in any way.
```

If a name server restarts with a broken catalog zone, the broken catalog should
not prevent the name server from starting up and serving the member zones in
the last valid version of the catalog zone.

> Processing of a broken catalog will start (or resume) when the catalog turns
> into a correct catalog zone, for example by an additional update (through zone
> transfer or updates) fixing the catalog zone.

Author: @peterthomassen  @matje , like this?
```suggestion
Processing of a broken catalog SHALL start (or resume) when the catalog turns
into a correct catalog zone, for example by an additional update (through zone
transfer or updates) fixing the catalog zone.
```

As it is a regular DNS zone, a catalog zone can be transferred using DNS zone
transfers among nameservers.

Catalog updates should be automatic, i.e., when a nameserver that supports
catalog zones completes a zone transfer for a catalog zone, it SHOULD apply
changes to the catalog within the running nameserver automatically without any
manual intervention.

Nameservers MAY allow loading and transfer of broken zones with incorrect
catalog zone syntax (as they are treated as regular zones).
Catalog consumers MUST ignore broken catalog zones, however a clear error

> message stating the reason why the catalog zone is broken MUST be logged.

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: Fixed in commit 830d3346

> Catalog consumers MUST ignore broken catalog zones, however a clear error
> message stating the reason why the catalog zone is broken MUST be logged.

Author: ```suggestion
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).
```

When a previously correct catalog zone becomes a broken catalog zone, because
of an update through an incremental transfer or otherwise, it loses its catalog
meaning.
No special processing occurs, no previously by this catalog configured member

> are removed or reconfigured in any way.

Reviewer 2: Shall we use normative uppercase key words?

Reviewer 4: Here RFC 2119 language makes sense to me yes.

> If a name server restarts with a broken catalog zone, the broken catalog should

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: processed

Author: 5de9a210

not prevent the name server from starting up and serving the member zones in
the last valid version of the catalog zone.

Processing of a broken catalog will start (or resume) when the catalog turns
into a correct catalog zone, for example by an additional update (through zone

> transfer or updates) fixing the catalog zone.

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: Fixed in commit 5de9a210

Similarly, when a catalog zone expires, it loses its catalog meaning and
MUST no longer be processed as such.
No special processing occurs until the zone becomes fresh again.

Great power comes with great responsibility: Catalog zones simplifies zone
provisioning by orchestrating zones on secondary name servers from a single
data source - the catalog.  Hence, the catalog source has great power and
changes must be treated carefully. For example if the catalog is generated by
some script and this script for whatever reason generates an empty catalog,
millions of member zones may get deleted from their secondaries within seconds

> and all the affected domains may be offline in a blink.

Reviewer 4: This "great power" warning would make more sense in the "Operational Notes" section to me.

As it is a regular DNS zone, a catalog zone can be transferred using DNS zone
transfers among nameservers.

Catalog updates should be automatic, i.e., when a nameserver that supports
catalog zones completes a zone transfer for a catalog zone, it SHOULD apply
changes to the catalog within the running nameserver automatically without any
manual intervention.

Nameservers MAY allow loading and transfer of broken zones with incorrect
catalog zone syntax (as they are treated as regular zones).
The reason a catalog zone is considered broken SHOULD always be communicated clearly to the operator (e.g. through a log message).

When a previously correct catalog zone becomes a broken catalog zone, because
of an update through an incremental transfer or otherwise, it loses its catalog
meaning.

> No special processing occurs. Member zones previously configured by this catalog
> SHOULD NOT be removed or reconfigured in any way.

Author: Ack!

```suggestion
No special processing occurs. Member zones previously configured by this catalog
MUST NOT be removed or reconfigured in any way.
```

When a previously correct catalog zone becomes a broken catalog zone, because
of an update through an incremental transfer or otherwise, it loses its catalog
meaning.
No special processing occurs. Member zones previously configured by this catalog

> SHOULD NOT be removed or reconfigured in any way.

Reviewer 4: This `SHOULD NOT` could be bumped into a `MUST NOT`. An edge case where an implementation removes such member zone can only cause mayhem I think.

Author: Resolved in 48ad7538

Recovery from such a situation is out of the scope of this document.
It may for example entail a manually forced retransfer of `$NEWCATZ` to consumers after they have been detected to have received and processed the removal of the member zone from `$OLDCATZ`.

## Zone-associated state reset {#zonereset}

It may be desirable to reset state (such as zone data and DNSSEC keys) associated with a member zone.

A zone state reset may be performed by a change of the member node's name (see (#namechange)).

# Implementation and operational Notes {#implementationnotes}

Although any valid domain name can be used for the catalog name $CATZ, it is
RECOMMENDED to use either a domain name owned by the catalog producer, or to
use a name under a suitable Special-Use Domain Name [@!RFC6761].

Catalog zones on secondary nameservers would have to be setup manually, perhaps

> as static configuration, similar to how ordinary DNS zones are configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as static configuration, similar to how ordinary DNS zones are configured when catalog zones or another automatic configuration mechanism is not in place.
```

The secondary additionally needs to be configured as a catalog consumer for the catalog zone to enable processing of the member zones in the catalog, such as automatic synchronization of the member zones for secondary service.

Operators of catalog consumers should note that secondary name servers may

> receive DNS NOTIFY messages [@!RFC1996] for a zones before they are seen as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive DNS NOTIFY messages [@!RFC1996] for zones before they are seen as a
```
